feat: add view based access control documentation (#458)
vaadin/docs: articles/flow/integrations/spring/view-based-access-control.asciidoc

---

> title: View Based Access Control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: View-Based Access Control
```

This happens generally for any single-page application that tries to secure its routes using only Spring Security.

.Do not rely on Spring Security's URL-based authorization in single-page applications
[NOTE]
View-based access control is the main mechanism for restricting access to views.
You should not use the traditional Spring Security URL-based [classname]#HttpSecurity# configurations as a mechanism for securing views at all (except for static resources, as URLs are the only way to load them).

*This is where view-based access control comes in*, to fully secure views in Vaadin Flow applications in a very flexible way, based on different access level annotations.
The view-based access control mechanism uses the `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, `@RolesAllowed`, and `@DenyAll` annotations on view classes to define the access control rules.

.The use of annotations in Vaadin Fusion
[TIP]
Although the same set of annotations are used to define the security access control rules on endpoints of a <<{articles}/fusion/overview#,Vaadin Fusion>> application, this document does not describe how to secure client-side views.

> You can find out more about security in a Vaadin Fusion application <<{articles}/fusion/security/configuring#,here>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is described in <<{articles}/fusion/security/configuring#,Configuring Security>> in Fusion documentation.
```

The approach of the of this documentation is based on Vaadin's Spring Boot and Spring Security autoconfiguration.

== View-Based Access Control in Spring Boot-Based Applications

As mentioned in the <<Introduction,Introduction>>, the mechanism is based on Spring Security and Vaadin's Spring Boot autoconfiguration.
To enable the mechanism in a Vaadin Flow Spring Boot application without any security, add the following to the project (if they do not exist already):

- A Login view.
- Spring Security dependencies.
- A security configuration class that extends `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
- Annotate the view classes with the `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, or `@RolesAllowed` annotations.

> .Source for the complete example code
> [TIP]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Too many admonitions in the page.

> A complete example project, including the source code from this document, is available https://github.com/vaadin-learning-center/crm-tutorial/tree/latest[here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A complete example project, including the source code from this document, is available at https://github.com/vaadin-learning-center/crm-tutorial/tree/latest[`github.com/vaadin-learning-center/crm-tutorial`].
```

=== Login View

Having a login view is a basic requirement of many authentication and authorization mechanisms, in order to be able to redirect anonymous users to that page before giving access to view any protected resources.

> .`LoginView.java`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.[classname]#LoginView.java#
```

    }
}
----

.Usage of Vaadin's LoginForm component
[NOTE]
In this example, we use Vaadin's `LoginForm` component for the sake of brevity in this implementation.
However, there is no obligation to do so; feel free to implement your own Login view, as you wish.

=== Spring Security Dependencies

To enable Spring Security there are certain dependencies that should be added to the project.
_As this documentation is based on Spring Boot, we recommend adding the following dependency_:

.Spring Boot Starter Security dependency that should be added to the `pom.xml` file:
[source,XML]
----
<dependencies>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-security</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
</dependencies>
----

=== Security Configuration Class

The next step is to have a Spring Security Configuration class that extends `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
There is no convention for naming this class, so in this documentation it is named `SecurityConfiguration`.
However, take care with Spring Security annotations.
Here is a minimal implementation of such a class:

> .`SecurityConfiguration.java`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.[filename]#SecurityConfiguration.java#
```

Now that the `LoginView` is ready, and it is set as the login view in the security configuration, it is time to move forward and see how the security annotations work on the views.

=== Annotating the View Classes

Before we provide some usage examples of the access annotations, it would be useful to have a closer look at the annotations, and their meaning when applied to a view:

- `@AnonymousAllowed` permits anyone to navigate to the view without any authentication or authorization.
- `@PermitAll` allows any *authenticated* user to navigate to the view.
- `@RolesAllowed` grants access to users having the roles specified in the annotation value.
- `@DenyAll` disallows everyone from navigating to the view.
This is the default, which means that, if a view is not annotated at all, the `@DenyAll` logic is applied.

Note that when the security configuration class extends from `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`, Vaadin's `SpringSecurityAutoConfiguration` comes into play and *enables the view-based access control* mechanism.
Therefore, none of the views are accessible until one of the above annotations (except `@DenyAll`) is applied to them.

Some examples:

> .Example of using @AnonymousAllowed to enable all users to navigate to this view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example of using [classname]#@AnonymousAllowed# to enable all users to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Public View")
@AnonymousAllowed
public class PublicView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> .Example of using @PermitAll to allow only authenticated users (with any role) to navigate to this view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example of using [classname]#@PermitAll# to allow only authenticated users (with any role) to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "private", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Private View")
@PermitAll
public class PrivateView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> .Example of using @RolesAllowed to enable only the users with `ADMIN` role to navigate to this view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example of using [classname]#@RolesAllowed# to enable only the users with `ADMIN` role to navigate to this view
```

---
title: View Based Access Control

> order: 25

Reviewer 2: I think the ordering is now weird - IMO this should be after `Routing`. So please move it between `Routing` and `Scopes`.

Author: Hmm... Makes more sense. 
Done.

However, there is no obligation to do so; feel free to implement your own Login view, as you wish.

=== Spring Security Dependencies

To enable Spring Security there are certain dependencies that should be added to the project.
_As this documentation is based Spring Boot, we recommend adding the following dependency_:

.Spring Boot Starter Security dependency that should be added to the `pom.xml` file:
[source,XML]
----
<dependencies>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-security</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
</dependencies>
----

=== Security Configuration Class

The next step is to have a Spring Security Configuration class that extends `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
There is no convention for naming this class, so in this documentation it is named `SecurityConfiguration`.
However, take care with Spring Security annotations.
Here is a minimal implementation of such a class:

.`SecurityConfiguration.java`
[source,java]
----
@EnableWebSecurity // <1>
@Configuration

> public class SecurityConfiguration extends VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter { // <2>

Reviewer 2: This should be on two lines as the code line is too long

Author: Done.

        // Configure your static resources with public access here:
        web.ignoring().antMatchers(
                "/images/**"
        );

        // Delegating the ignoring configuration for Vaadin's
        // related static resources to the super class:
        super.configure(web);
    }

    /**
     * Demo UserDetailService which only provide two hardcoded
     * in memory users and their roles.
     * NOTE: This should not be used in real world applications.
     */
    @Bean
    @Override
    public UserDetailsService userDetailsService() {
        UserDetails user =
                User.withUsername("user")
                        .password("{noop}user")
                        .roles("USER")
                        .build();
        UserDetails admin =
                User.withUsername("admin")
                        .password("{noop}admin")
                        .roles("ADMIN")
                        .build();
        return new InMemoryUserDetailsManager(user, admin);
    }
}
----

<1> Notice the presence of `@EnableWebSecurity` and `@Configuration` annotations on top of the above class.
As their names imply, they tell Spring to enable its security features.

> <2> The next thing to notice is the parent class: `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.

Reviewer 2: I would add the following points as numbered bullets too, but the text needs to be worked still. Maybe some parts moved to after the numbered bullets.

Author: Done, may need some improvements.

If you are familiar with Spring Boot and Spring Security, you may be aware that you can extend Spring's `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` directly and configure a lot of things from scratch.
However, there are some benefits to extending from `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`:

> - The default implementation of the `configure` methods takes care of all the Vaadin-related configurations, for example ignoring static resources, or enabling `CSRF` checking while ignoring unnecessary checking for Vaadin internal requests, etc.

Reviewer 2: Why is this sentence not numbered with code on `configure()` method, like above? IMO it should be

Author: The idea of indented bullets was that this benefit can be used as the result of inheriting `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.

Rewrote it in a numbered style, but it has the potential to improve the language.

- The view-based access control mechanism is enabled by default.

> - The login view can be configured simply via the provided `setLoginView` method.

Reviewer 2: Why is this sentence not numbered with code like above? IMO it should be

Author: Done.

---
title: View Based Access Control
order: 25
layout: page
---

= View-Based Access Control

> Vaadin Flow applications can use a view-based Access Control mechanism out of the box.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Vaadin Flow applications can use a view-based access control mechanism out of the box.
```

If an application is based on Spring Boot, this mechanism can be enabled by using a set of annotations and with minimum Spring Security configurations.
However, it is also possible to use it in Vaadin Spring applications that are not based on Spring Boot with some extra configurations.

== Introduction

Protecting restricted views in Spring based Vaadin Flow applications can happen through the following ways:

- By using Spring Security's URL pattern based HTTP security configurations

> - By adding View-Based Access Control mechanism

Author: It is supposed to be this view-based access control, not just `a` view-based access control.

[NOTE]
It is important to note that this View Based Access Control should be considered as the main mechanism of restricting access to the views.
The traditional Spring Security's URL-based [classname]#HttpSecurity# configurations should not be considered as the security mechanism for securing the views at all, except for the static resources as there is no way to load them other than URLs.

*This is where View Based Access Control comes in*, to fully securing the views of Vaadin Flow applications based on different access level annotations in a very flexible way.
The view-based Access Control mechanism uses the `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, `@RolesAllowed`, and `@DenyAll` annotations on view classes to define the access control rules.

.Use of the annotations in Vaadin Fusion
[TIP]
Although, the same set of annotations are used to define the security access control rules on endpoints of a <<{articles}/fusion/overview#,Vaadin Fusion>> application, this document should not be considered as the way of securing client side views.
You can find out more about Security in a Vaadin Fusion application <<{articles}/fusion/security/configuring#,here>>.

> The approach of the <<View Based Access Control in Spring Boot Based Applications,first part of this documentation>> is based on Vaadin's Spring Boot and Spring Security autoconfiguration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The approach of the <<View-Based Access Control in Spring Boot-Based Applications,first part of this documentation>> is based on Vaadin's Spring Boot and Spring Security autoconfiguration.
```

If you are not using Spring Boot in your Vaadin Flow application, you may need extra configurations to enable this Access Control mechanism, that are addressed in <<View Based Access Control in Spring Based Applications>> (without Spring Boot).

== View Based Access Control in Spring Boot Based Applications

As mentioned in the <<Introduction,Introduction>>, the mechanism is based on Spring Security and Vaadin's Spring Boot autoconfiguration.
To enable the mechanism in a Vaadin Flow Spring Boot application without any security, the following should be added to the project (if not exist already):

- A Login view.
- Spring Security dependencies.
- A security configuration class that extends `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
- Annotating the view classes with `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, or `@RolesAllowed` annotations.

.Source for the complete example code
[TIP]

> A complete example project including the source codes of this documentation is available https://github.com/vaadin-learning-center/crm-tutorial/tree/latest[here].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A complete example project, including the source code from this document, is available https://github.com/vaadin-learning-center/crm-tutorial/tree/latest[here].
```

=== Login View

> Having a login view is one of the basic requirements of many authentication and authorization mechanisms to be able to redirect the anonymous users to that page before giving the access of viewing any protected resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Having a login view is a basic requirement of many authentication and authorization mechanisms, in order to be able to redirect anonymous users to that page before giving access to view any protected resources.
```

.`LoginView.java`
[source,java]
----
@Route("login")
@PageTitle("Login")
public class LoginView extends VerticalLayout implements BeforeEnterObserver {

    LoginForm login = new LoginForm();

    public LoginView() {
        addClassName("login-view");
        setSizeFull();

        setJustifyContentMode(JustifyContentMode.CENTER);
        setAlignItems(Alignment.CENTER);

        login.setAction("login");

        add(
            new H1("Test Application"),
            login
        );
    }

    @Override
    public void beforeEnter(BeforeEnterEvent beforeEnterEvent) {
        if(beforeEnterEvent.getLocation()
        .getQueryParameters()
        .getParameters()
        .containsKey("error")) {
            login.setError(true);
        }
    }
}
----

> .Usage of Vaadin's LoginForm Component

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Usage of Vaadin's LoginForm component
```

[NOTE]

> In this example, Vaadin's `LoginForm` component is used to make the implementation more brief, but there is no obligation to do so, feel free to implement your own Login view, as you wish.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, we use Vaadin's `LoginForm` component for the sake of brevity in this implementation.
However, there is no obligation to do so; feel free to implement your own Login view, as you wish.
```

=== Spring Security Dependencies

To enable Spring Security in a Spring Boot application there are certain dependencies that should be added to the project.

> _As this part of the documentation is based on a Spring Boot project, adding the following dependency is recommended_:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_As this part of the documentation is based on a Spring Boot project, we recommend adding the following dependency_:
```

> .Spring Boot Starter Security dependency that should be added to `pom.xml` file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Spring Boot Starter Security dependency that should be added to the `pom.xml` file:
```

[source,XML]
----
<dependencies>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-security</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
</dependencies>
----

=== Security Configuration Class

> Next step is to have a Spring Security Configuration class that extends `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The next step is to have a Spring Security Configuration class that extends `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
```

> No convention exists for naming this class, so in this documentation it is named as `SecurityConfiguration`, but pay attention to Spring Security annotations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is no convention for naming this class, so in this documentation it is named `SecurityConfiguration`.
However, take care with Spring Security annotations.
```

> A minimal implementation of such class is as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here is a minimal implementation of such a class:
```

    }

    /**
     * Allows access to static resources, bypassing Spring security.
     */
    @Override
    public void configure(WebSecurity web) throws Exception {
        // Configure your static resources with public access here:
        web.ignoring().antMatchers(
                "/images/**"
        );

        // Delegating the ignoring configuration for Vaadin's
        // related static resources to the super class:
        super.configure(web);
    }

    /**
     * Demo UserDetailService which only provide two hardcoded
     * in memory users and their roles.
     * NOTE: This should not be used in real world applications.
     */
    @Bean
    @Override
    public UserDetailsService userDetailsService() {
        UserDetails user =
                User.withUsername("user")
                        .password("{noop}user")
                        .roles("USER")
                        .build();
        UserDetails admin =
                User.withUsername("admin")
                        .password("{noop}admin")
                        .roles("ADMIN")
                        .build();
        return new InMemoryUserDetailsManager(user, admin);
    }
}
----

> Before going any further it worth noticing the presence of `@EnableWebSecurity` and `@Configuration` on top of the above class.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before we go any further, it is worth noticing the `@EnableWebSecurity` and `@Configuration` annotations on top of the above class.
```

> As their name imply, they tell the Spring to enable its security features.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As their names imply, they tell Spring to enable its security features.
```

> Next thing to notice is the parent class: `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The next thing to notice is the parent class: `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
```

> As you might be familiar with Spring Boot and Spring Security, you may have seen that you can extend Spring's `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` directly and configure a lot of things from scratch, but by extending from `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` there would be some benefits:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are familiar with Spring Boot and Spring Security, you may be aware that you can extend Spring's `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` directly and configure a lot of things from scratch.
However, there are some benefits to extending from `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
```

> - Default implementation of `configure` methods would take care of all the Vaadin related configurations, for example ignoring the static resources, or to enable the `CSRF` checking while ignoring the unnecessary checking for Vaadin internal requests, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The default implementation of the `configure` methods takes care of all the Vaadin-related configurations, for example ignoring static resources, or enabling `CSRF` checking while ignoring unnecessary checking for Vaadin internal requests, etc.
```

- The View Based Access Control mechanism is enabled by default.
- The login view can be configured simply via provided method `setLoginView`.

.Never use hard-coded credentials in production
[NOTE]

> By looking at the implementation of `userDetailsService` method, it is obvious that this is just an in-memory implementation for the sake of briefness in this documentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The implementation of `userDetailsService` method is obviously just an in-memory implementation for the sake of brevity in this documentation.
```

> In a real-world application You can change the Spring Security configuration to use an authentication provider for LDAP, JAAS, and other real world sources. https://dzone.com/articles/spring-security-authentication[Read more about Spring Security authentication providers].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a real-world application, you can change the Spring Security configuration to use an authentication provider for LDAP, JAAS, and other real-world sources. https://dzone.com/articles/spring-security-authentication[Read more about Spring Security authentication providers].
```

> The most important configuration in the above example, is the call to the `setLoginView(http, LoginView.class);` inside the first configure method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most important configuration in the above example is the call to the `setLoginView(http, LoginView.class);` inside the first configure method.
```

> This is how the view based Access Control mechanism knows where to redirect the users once they attempt to navigate to a protected view.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is how the view-based access control mechanism knows where to redirect the users when they attempt to navigate to a protected view.
```

Now that the `LoginView` is ready, and it is set as the login view in the security configuration, it is time to move forward and see how the security annotations work on the views.

=== Annotating the View Classes

> Before providing a usage examples of the access annotations, it would be beneficial to have a closer look at the annotations, and their meaning when applied on a view:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before we provide some usage examples of the access annotations, it would be useful to have a closer look at the annotations, and their meaning when applied to a view:
```

> - `@AnonymousAllowed` Permits anyone to navigate to the view without any authentication or authorization.
> - `@PermitAll` Allows any *authenticated* user to navigate to the view.
> - `@RolesAllowed` Grants access to users having the roles specified in the annotation value.
> - `@DenyAll` Disallows to navigate to the view for everyone.
> This is the default, which means if a view is not annotated at all, the `@DenyAll` logic would be applied.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `@AnonymousAllowed` permits anyone to navigate to the view without any authentication or authorization.
- `@PermitAll` allows any *authenticated* user to navigate to the view.
- `@RolesAllowed` grants access to users having the roles specified in the annotation value.
- `@DenyAll` disallows everyone from navigating to the view.
This is the default, which means that, if a view is not annotated at all, the `@DenyAll` logic is applied.
```

This should be highlighted that when the security configuration class is extending from `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`, Vaadin's `SpringSecurityAutoConfiguration` would come into play and *enables the View Based Access Control* mechanism.

> Therefore, none of the views are accessible, until one of the above annotations (except the `@DenyAll`) is applied to them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, none of the views are accessible until one of the above annotations (except `@DenyAll`) is applied to them.
```

Some examples:

> .Example of using @AnonymousAllowed to enable all users navigating to this view

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Example of using @AnonymousAllowed to enable all users to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Public View")
@AnonymousAllowed
public class PublicView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> .Example of using @PermitAll to allow only authenticated users (with any role) navigating to this view

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Example of using @PermitAll to allow only authenticated users (with any role) to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "private", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Private View")
@PermitAll
public class PrivateView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> .Example of using @RolesAllowed to enable only the users with `ADMIN` role navigating to this view

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Example of using @RolesAllowed to enable only the users with `ADMIN` role to navigate to this view
```

[source,java]
----
@Route(value = "admin", layout = MainView.class)
@PageTitle("Admin View")
@RolesAllowed("ADMIN") // <- Should match one of the user's roles (case-sensitive)
public class AdminView extends VerticalLayout {
    // ...
}
----

> If multiple annotations specified on a single view, the following rules are applied:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If multiple annotations are specified on a single view, the following rules are applied:
```

- `DenyAll` overrides other annotations
- `AnonymousAllowed` overrides `RolesAllowed` and `PermitAll`
- `RolesAllowed` overrides `PermitAll`

> However, specifying more than one of the above access annotations on a view class in not recommended, as it is confusing and probably has no logical reason to do so.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, specifying more than one of the above access annotations on a view class is not recommended, as it is confusing and there is probably no logical reason to do so.
```

> == View Based Access Control in Spring Based Applications

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
== View-Based Access Control in Spring-Based Applications
```

> The configuration steps for a Vaadin Flow Spring application would be quite similar to some steps of the Vaadin Flow application which is based on Spring Boot.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The configuration steps for a Vaadin Flow Spring application are quite similar to those of a Vaadin Flow application which is based on Spring Boot.
```

> - The application obviously should have a login view, an example login view can be found <<Login View,here>>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The application should obviously have a login view; you can see an example login view <<Login View,here>>.
```

- The Spring Security dependencies are as follows:

> .Direct Spring Security dependencies that should be added to `pom.xml` file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Direct Spring Security dependencies that should be added to the `pom.xml` file:
```

[source,XML]
----
<dependencies>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.security</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-security-web</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.security</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-security-config</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
</dependencies>
----

- A security configuration class that extends `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
This would be quite similar to the <<Security Configuration Class,Security Configuration Class>> example for a Vaadin Flow application based on Spring Boot.

- Some extra steps

> //TODO: provide extra steps for a Spring based application

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
//TODO: provide extra steps for a Spring-based application
```

- Annotating the view classes with `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, or `@RolesAllowed` annotations.

> Again, this is completely similar to the <<Annotating the View Classes,provided examples>> for a Vaadin Flow application based on Spring Boot.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Again, this is very similar to the <<Annotating the View Classes,provided examples>> for a Vaadin Flow application based on Spring Boot.
```

== Limitations

> Mixing any of the view access annotations with Spring's URL based HTTP security (which probably are existing in older Vaadin Spring Boot applications) may result in unwanted access configurations or unnecessary complications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mixing any of the view access annotations with Spring's URL-based HTTP security (which probably exist in older Vaadin Spring Boot applications) may result in unwanted access configurations or unnecessary complications.
```

> .Do not mix Spring's URL based HTTP security and View based Access Control on a single view

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Do not mix Spring's URL-based HTTP security and view-based access control on a single view
```

[NOTE]

> Vaadin strongly recommends *not* to mix Spring's URL Pattern based HTTP security and this View-based Access Control mechanism targeting same views, since it may lead to unwanted access configurations, or at least an unnecessary complication in the authorization of the views.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Vaadin strongly recommends *not* mixing Spring's URL-pattern-based HTTP security and this view-based access control mechanism targeting the same views, since it may lead to unwanted access configurations, or at the very least an unnecessary complication in the authorization of views.
```

---
title: View Based Access Control
order: 25
layout: page
---

= View-Based Access Control

> [role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V20 standalone"]

Author: Done.

- A Login view.
- Spring Security dependencies.
- A security configuration class that extends `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
- Annotate the view classes with the `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, or `@RolesAllowed` annotations.

.Source for the complete example code
[TIP]
A complete example project, including the source code from this document, is available https://github.com/vaadin-learning-center/crm-tutorial/tree/latest[here].

=== Login View

Having a login view is a basic requirement of many authentication and authorization mechanisms, in order to be able to redirect anonymous users to that page before giving access to view any protected resources.

.`LoginView.java`
[source,java]
----
@Route("login")
@PageTitle("Login")
public class LoginView extends VerticalLayout implements BeforeEnterObserver {

    LoginForm login = new LoginForm();

    public LoginView() {
        addClassName("login-view");
        setSizeFull();

        setJustifyContentMode(JustifyContentMode.CENTER);
        setAlignItems(Alignment.CENTER);

        login.setAction("login");

        add(
            new H1("Test Application"),

>             login

Author: Done.

        );
    }

    @Override
    public void beforeEnter(BeforeEnterEvent beforeEnterEvent) {
        if(beforeEnterEvent.getLocation()
        .getQueryParameters()
        .getParameters()

>         .containsKey("error")) {

Author: Done.

    }

    /**
     * Allows access to static resources, bypassing Spring security.
     */
    @Override
    public void configure(WebSecurity web) throws Exception {
        // Configure your static resources with public access here:
        web.ignoring().antMatchers(
                "/images/**"
        );

        // Delegating the ignoring configuration for Vaadin's
        // related static resources to the super class:
        super.configure(web);
    }

    /**
     * Demo UserDetailService which only provide two hardcoded
     * in memory users and their roles.
     * NOTE: This should not be used in real world applications.
     */
    @Bean
    @Override
    public UserDetailsService userDetailsService() {
        UserDetails user =
                User.withUsername("user")
                        .password("{noop}user")
                        .roles("USER")
                        .build();
        UserDetails admin =
                User.withUsername("admin")
                        .password("{noop}admin")
                        .roles("ADMIN")
                        .build();
        return new InMemoryUserDetailsManager(user, admin);
    }
}
----

> 

Author: I think since the codes are available in some repository (mentioned somewhere up there) it makes sense to add those numbered bullets.

> 

Author: Done.

Before we go any further, it is worth noticing the `@EnableWebSecurity` and `@Configuration` annotations on top of the above class.
As their names imply, they tell Spring to enable its security features.

The next thing to notice is the parent class: `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
If you are familiar with Spring Boot and Spring Security, you may be aware that you can extend Spring's `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` directly and configure a lot of things from scratch.

> However, there are some benefits to extending from `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.

Author: Yeah, I guess it changed to a `.` in one of the accepted suggestions. Changed it back to `:`.

- The default implementation of the `configure` methods takes care of all the Vaadin-related configurations, for example ignoring static resources, or enabling `CSRF` checking while ignoring unnecessary checking for Vaadin internal requests, etc.
- The view-based access control mechanism is enabled by default.
- The login view can be configured simply via the provided `setLoginView` method.

.Never use hard-coded credentials in production

> [NOTE]

Author: Done.

      <artifactId>spring-security-web</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.security</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-security-config</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    <!-- other dependencies -->
</dependencies>
----

- A security configuration class that extends `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.
This would be quite similar to the <<Security Configuration Class,Security Configuration Class>> example for a Vaadin Flow application based on Spring Boot.

- Some extra steps
//TODO: provide extra steps for a Spring-based application

- Annotating the view classes with `@AnonymousAllowed`, `@PermitAll`, or `@RolesAllowed` annotations.
Again, this is very similar to the <<Annotating the View Classes,provided examples>> for a Vaadin Flow application based on Spring Boot.

== Limitations
Mixing any of the view access annotations with Spring's URL-based HTTP security (which probably exist in older Vaadin Spring Boot applications) may result in unwanted access configurations or unnecessary complications.

.Do not mix Spring's URL-based HTTP security and view-based access control on a single view

> [NOTE]

Reviewer 2: Use `WARNING:` or `IMPORTANT:` instead

Author: Done.

As their names imply, they tell Spring to enable its security features.

> <2> The next thing to notice is the parent class: `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`.

Reviewer 2: I would change the lines for bullet two to just:
```suggestion
<2> `VaadinWebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` is a helper class that extends Spring's `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` and configures the common Vaadin related Spring security settings. By extending it the view-based access control mechanism is enabled automatically, and no further configurations are needed to enable it. Other of benefits are covered as follows.
```
